remembering
===========

This is year marks the ~~five~~ six years since my sisters suicide (I
can't even count). Every year, I feel like the month of May is
unreasonably bad and emotional for me. I never really know how to deal
with it, it's not something I talk about a lot about. I'm always just
having such a shit show with my everyday life that I have a hard time
talking to therapists who I just ramble on about day to day things to.
And sometimes it seems like I just "make it about me" or
something...just filter everything through my own lens

It hurts a lot. I remember her sometimes in such weird fragments of
memory, and they are not necessarily the deepest or seemingly special.
She also had a really hard life and it is hard to think about that
sometimes too. I remember when she was growing up I'd try to teach her
to do stuff like wash dishes and she really didn't want to wash the
knives and I remember feeling bad because I pushed her too hard trying
to learn do that once. I remember when she was home schooled (because
there was a limbo time when our family considered moving overseas) and I
helped her a little bit with the online classes, and playing a game kind
of like bomberman with her online, her on her computer and me on mine. I
remember taking her and our cousin, who was one of her best friends, to
lakeside theme park. I remember I had made a silly mixtape for that
lakeside trip that was pretty silly with indie pop songs and stuff. I
remember driving her to school one mildly snowy morning when she had
returned from the wilderness school, when I was living at home in
college. Then this is not even my sister but I think of bad memories
like me playing music too loud and my mom storming down to tell me to
shut it off. I imagine that I just must have caused her pain from living
at home during that time or something. I remember when she was going
through really tough times I'd just try to relate to her and say she was
doing really well. I remember one night she went to denver by herself
and I remembered doing crazy stuff like that when I was in high school
too. There was maybe more of an undercurrent of difficulty there though.
I remember I was visiting Berkeley and her and my dad came and met up
with me and we went down to the san francisco bridge, with it's rusty
chains down by the water. I remember she came to visit me in Columbia
Missouri, I picked her and my dad up in St Louis, and we drove them to a
car dealership when my sister got her first car. They came back and we
swam in a hotel pool in Columbia. My dad is such a strong person I feel
like and really gave us all the best for us kids.



Lara loved music. I remember stumbling into her room one time and really
loving some of the songs she had. One was by a band called Braves. She
loved friends. She was forced to break out of her shell a little bit and
I think she really started to grow. You look through some photos and you
can see she her doing group projects outdoors, covered in dirt. There
are pictures of her resting her head on her friends shoulders. Pictures
of her visiting paris and amsterdam with our cousin. I remember her for
being shy, but loving...the youngest sibling...i can't even now fathom
the pain and I just am trying to remember memories here but I miss her
so much now...miss you Lara




![](https://64.media.tumblr.com/f6cc4bd37227cab1aa8d9812e116c184/fb62d1aca4f5b588-3f/s640x960/2bd031311cc2ccecc4dc46cd5490cd14e10bb9be.jpg)

::: {#footer}
[ May 26th, 2021 10:59am ]{#timestamp} [suicide]{.tag} [family]{.tag}
:::
