import Layout from "../components/Layout"


# Challenges I have faced learning React

 Learning React was a big challenge for me. I started learning React in earnest
in 2019. It was a difficult experience overall, but I wanted to go over my
learning experience, and maybe find some lessons in the mix.  This goes mostly
into personal details and doesn't really get too technical, however, I review
the commit logs and try and backtrace my feelings that I remember at the time.

If I were to take away anything from this, it's probably that pair programming
was really useful especially as a remote worker, I had nothing before that
except weekly standups where I felt really depressed. Also stay patient, stay
thankful, and try to focus while you learn



**Introduction to me**



I am maybe what you'd call a front-end engineer. I have done web development
for about 7 years now. I worked on various fast-becoming-legacy projects and
greenfield that were made in Ruby, PHP, Perl CGI, Java servlets, etc.

**Early dabbles with React circa 2016**

I had a random `<form>` that I was tasked with making and I wanted to code and
wanted to try using React. I tried importing React via a CDN  and gave it a
shot, and it seemed simple enough, but I kept getting really confused about how
to even read and initialize the value of a textbox for example properly. TLDR:
I was not aware of what a *controlled component* was.

The idea of controlled components quite unintuitive and I didn't know the words
for it. Instead, I kept googling weird things like "two way data binding react"
and variants of this (I had never used angular but I heard of two-way data
binding from angular, and I just felt like it was what I needed). I even posted
about my frustrations about this on the react subreddit and was downvoted. Felt
bad. I was just really confused.  I abandoned the project in react and just
used our normal jqueryish thing.



**New job in 2018**

When I got a call about a new job in 2018, I was really happy and started in
June 2018. They decided they are going to do "the big rewrite" and are going to
use React. My coworker started building the new react app prototype. My
coworker keeps asking me "what state management library should we use". I just
had no idea about React still, I had not ever looked into state management, and
basically just was like "I dunno!". I had no way to form an opinion. I was also
working on some misc stuff sort of unrelated to the rewrite and remained pretty
out of the loop. We would have weekly meetings but I just wouldn't really
understand the goings ons. This didn't feel great



**I am floundering...not understanding what's going on with the rewrite**

It's December 2018, I go home for Christmas and I have an honest talk with my
parents and tell them "I don't get what is happening in the new codebase, I'm
honestly unhappy, and it just does all this 'react' stuff" but I can't explain
react to them I just say the code is automatically reacting to other things. My
parents say "well if you are unhappy you might have to leave your job" and they
are not like, cheering for me to leave, but they tell me that. At this point,
it really hit me that I do like this job and I decided to try to focus on work.



**I try and make an honest attempt to get involved in the project, start pair
programming**



On January 10th 2019 I make my first commit to the rewrite by doing some
monkey-see monkey-do type coding. I copy a bunch of files and just put them in
the right place, tweak some lines, and start to figure out how to make things
run. By the end of January 2019 I get my first code change merged. I also
suggested that we start doing **pair-programming sessions**. Once I started
these it made a huge difference for me in learning how to code.  The pair
programming often still way over my head due to how my coworker presented stuff
or how much he assumed I understood. Nevertheless, these were extremely helpful
for me to help get caught up.

**I start to reading "Learning React"**

In March 2019, I got the book "Learning React" (O'Reilly2017
<https://www.oreilly.com/library/view/learning-react/9781491954614/>) for my
kindle.  Reading this book was a big help I felt, and provided a needed "brain
reset" for me. The book worked well for me, I read it each night on my kindle,
and the functional component concepts were super enlightening. To me it was so
much better reading a book than say and internet tutorial because I could
focus, not have distractions, etc. My eyes would just glaze over every time I
clicked on React blog posts and stuff before this.

So anyways, March 2019 goes on, and I'm learning, but our codebase still feels
pretty complicated and alien. We use mobx-state-tree and the glue for
mobx-state-tree to react e.g. the mobx-react doesn't really make sense to me. I
remember asking my coworkers why my component was not updating and they
eventually find out it's because I keep not using the observe() wrapper around
my components.

**I start to experiment with Typescript**

In April 2019 I start to experiment with typescript and release a typescript
version of some data parsing code. I start by explicity specifying a lot of
types but I eventually start getting into the zen of "type inference" and I
turn off the @typescript-eslint/explicit-function-return-type so I get implied
return types.



**I start using React hooks**

In May 2019 I try out my first React hook, I try a useState instead. It worked
well. I couldn't really figure out why I would use it instead of the mobx state
management we used elsewhere, but the example was that it was a click and drag
and it made sense to keep that click and drag state local to the component
rather than the "app"



**I start using react-testing-library**

In June 2019, I create "integration test" level tests for our app. I had used
react-testing-library for some components before this, but this was using
react-testing-library to render the entire "app level" component.  I was happy
to pioneer this and was happy to try this out instead of doing true browser
tests, and I think this has worked out well.

Some caveats: I got very caught up with trying to do canvas tests initially. I
really wanted to use jest-mock-canvas but we were using offscreencanvas via a
pretty complicated string of things, so I don't make progress here, and I also
got confused about the relationship between node-canvas and jest-mock-canvas
(they are basically totally different approaches). Later on, I find using
jest-image-snapshot of the canvas contents works nice (ref
<https://stackoverflow.com/questions/33269093/how-to-add-canvas-support-to-my-tests-in-jest>)

Other random note: when building out the integration tests, we got a lot
of "act warnings" which were confusing. These were fixed in React 16.9
(released August 2019), but we had to ignore them and they basically just
confused me a lot and made it feel like I was battling a very complex system
rather than a nice simple one.



**Conclusions**

Overall, I just wanted to write up my whole experience. It felt really
difficult for me to make these changes. I also went through a breakup during
this time, had a bad living situation, etc. so things were a struggle. If
anyone else has had struggles learning react, tell your story, and let me know.
I'd like to also thank everyone who helped me along the way. I feel like a much
better coder now, yet, I should always keep growing. The feeling of
uncomfortableness could be a growing experience.

::: {#footer} [ July 4th, 2020 3:02pm ]{#timestamp} [work]{.tag} [life]{.tag}
:::


export default ({ children }) => <Layout>{children}</Layout>
