---
title:
  Resist the urge to send raw LLM generated text, particularly about big
  impactful things
date: 2026-03-23
---

Preface: I have many opinions that are pretty inconsistent (read: I am a
hypocrite), so take post with a nice salty snack

## Intro

### Social media flood

People who have been online for more than 5 seconds know that the internet is
now flooded with LLM generated text. As a human, reading LLM generated text is
pretty insulting. Who the fuck is posting this. Is it a 100% automated robot or
some person, doing something really weird with a chat bot in another tab, trying
to post stuff for karma? For some other nefarious purpose?

At the same time, the stuff that these LLM say have various qualities also:

- They these posts are very highly tuned for engagement ('engagement bait')
- They can be pretty on point sometimes

This creates a real dilemma

If every post on reddit is generated by AI, and gets engagement, why not just
give it up, and post raw LLM text for your next work email, PR request contents,
or social media post

## AI generated text

The text that AI posts is very authoritative. That tends to be a good thing. But
AI is trained to be this way. Likely, during RLHF
(https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reinforcement_learning_from_human_feedback) and
other factors of their training, they are rewarded for making confident
statements. They also have system prompts that say things like "Act as a
world-class senior frontend React engineer with deep expertise". If you have
never read system prompts before, you will look at these things like wtf so full
of themselves. And indeed they are. They are like turbo chad.

But, the thing is, it gets results. They are less wishy washy. They don't ask
too many questions. They just do things.

The text that AI posts are also very comprehensive, summarizing all the changes
made for a PR

But there is, I guarantee it, a distinctly non-human aspect to the way they
write. It is just not quite there

And, particularly if you are doing what I want you to do with AI (Be ambitious,
do extremely complex tasks, don't just go on doing business as usual now that we
have AI superpowers) you will not gain a complete understanding of what you are
saying. If you are just making a run of the mill post, maybe you can say it is
fine. I don't really care. But I am speaking specifically when you are proposing
big impactful things.

I have also seen posts often say (if 'accused' of using LLM) that they are just
using LLM because they are a non-english speaker to "translate it from their
mother tongue". However, these usages are clearly not for mere 'translation' and
it is used for wholesale text generation, which I am not ok with. Sorry if that
sounds insensitive.

I have also seen many posts where people deny up and down that they are using
LLM. This is annoying to me because I think we should come from a place where we
are more open about our AI usage.

Footnote: This is a post that is in response to me doing this. I did this, and
it was not the right approach, and I t
