Slides from a presentation
==========================

Recently, I did a presentation for my lab group at school, and I wanted
to do an "experiment" and try to do everything without PowerPoint.

Crazy you say? Well, I considered some options, and I went ahead and
made my presentation using
[Slidify](http://ramnathv.github.io/slidify/customize.html)!!

I was super impressed with Slidify because it was very easy to get
started and it uses R Markdown syntax which I have already used for some
blog posts. To get started, you just use a textfile and separate the
slides using a newline with three dashes "---". After just a few
minutes, you can easily start generating HTML output slideshows that
work great.

It helps if you have some web design experience to use Slidify also,
because you can style Markdown code using CSS. Here is a discussion
about how to [align images in a markdown document, and I particularly
like the second
answer](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/255170/markdown-and-image-alignment).
Unfortunately. I had some trouble aligning images too, so I think I
could probably do with some practice (see Figure 1)

![](https://64.media.tumblr.com/fd0a1bbcb464afa24393fe7442906eda/311221fe66cef2f3-45/s540x810/ba83892db13b3c1a8075663407d9b9ae47647986.jpg)

Figure 1. Example slide from my presentation with a figure that is
cutoff. I used the CSS style "float:right" but for some reason it didn't
stay on the page.

I also wanted to publish my slides on the web, and found that you can
use Slidify to publish to your Github repository using [Github
Pages.](http://pages.github.com/) Again, this process was also
surprisingly simple: you simply make a branch on your repository that is
named "gh-pages" and push all your Slidify slides to it!

The outcome: [Comparison and analysis of ChIP-seq
experiments](http://tonto.github.io/macs-accessories/slides.html#1)

Feel free to check out the slides, and you can also see the code for
generating the slides on my [Github
Branch](https://github.com/tonto/macs-accessories/tree/gh-pages). Soon,
I may also update the code for the slides to generate the figures
instead of just linking to figures

::: {#footer}
[ July 9th, 2013 11:39pm ]{#timestamp} [slidify]{.tag} [rstats]{.tag}
[chip-seq]{.tag} [bioinformatics]{.tag} [slides]{.tag}
:::
