---
title: Creating high-resolution screenshots (of jbrowse) with phantomJS
date: 2015-03-02
---

Generating screenshots that are of high quality can be a great benefit for
things like science publications. PhantomJS is great for automating this in a
reproducible way. While many HTML pages can be rendered in high resolution
without modification, HTML5 canvas apps need special considerations (see this
[previous post on the topic](http://searchvoidstar.tumblr.com/post/86542847038/high-dpi-rendering-on-html5-canvas-some-problems)).

One of the key things that we noticed when we developed the high resolution
canvas rendering (see above link) is that the "devicePixelRatio" can increase
based on the browser's zoom level, and it can also take fractional values. This
was a difficult problem, to make rendering 100% consistent under all
devicePixelRatio values, so we created a config parameter called
highResolutionMode to accept arbitrary resolutions.

Later, we learned about PhantomJS and how it can be used for creating
screenshots, it was clear that our design for the settings arbitrary scaling
factors for the HTML5 canvas was very helpful, as we can set
highResolutionMode=4 along with the phantomJS variable page.zoomFactor=4, which
matches the resolutions and creates high-res canvas screenshots.

One of the reasons that this is important is that it doesn't look like PhantomJS
allows "devicePixelRatio" to be emulated, so the page.zoomFactor doesn't
necessarily set the devicePixelRatio to a higher number, so being able to set
the the arbitrary high resolution canvas scalings ourselves is a good solution.
Reference: issue open Jan 2013 https://github.com/ariya/phantomjs/issues/10964
and we are now in Aug 2015

Here are some examples of the rendering process.

## Examples

1.  Rendering screenshots to PNG

    phantomjs rasterize.js
    "http://localhost/jbrowse/?data=sample_data/json/volvox&tracklist=0"
    output.png "3800px\*1600px" 2

    [![](http://i.imgur.com/ABLo6WJ.png)](http://i.imgur.com/ABLo6WJ.png)

    Figure 1. A basic image output from phantomJS. It uses a zoomFactor=2 on the
    command line to match highResolutionMode=2 in the config file. \`

2.  Rendering screenshots to PDF. In JBrowse, this requires PhantomJS 2.0. Also
    see footnote.

    phantomjs rasterize.js
    "http://localhost/jbrowse/?data=sample_data/json/volvox&tracklist=0"
    output.pdf "16in\*8in"

    [Dropbox PDF 906kb](https://www.dropbox.com/s/7pceo4o406dys8s/output.pdf?dl=0)

    Figure 2. Outputted PDF from phantomJS. This still requires setting the
    configuration such as highResolutionMode=2 too

## Conclusion

In the future, we want to consider adding highResolutionMode to be specified via
the URL so that it doesn't need to be changed manually, although, setting
highResolutionMode=2 by default is not a bad strategy.

**Footnote**

I used the following patch for rasterize.js to help "fill out" the page space in
PDF renderings (otherwise, it is a square page, not super pretty for a
widescreen app). I guess rasterize.js is really just a template and not meant to
be super multi-purposed, so this custom modification helps for our case.

```

        diff --git a/examples/rasterize.js b/examples/rasterize.js
        index b0e0f67..3b0b6e4 100644
        --- a/examples/rasterize.js
        +++ b/examples/rasterize.js
        _@@ -14,6 +14,7 @@ if (system.args.length < 3 || system.args.length > 5) {
            page.viewportSize = { width: 600, height: 600 };
            if (system.args.length > 3 && system.args[2].substr(-4) === ".pdf") {
                size = system.args[3].split('_');

        +       page.viewportSize.width *= parseInt(size[0])/parseInt(size[1]);
                page.paperSize = size.length === 2 ? { width: size[0], height: size[1], margin: '0px' }

```

**Reference**

https://gmod.org/wiki/JBrowse_Configuration_Guide#Rendering_high_resolution_screenshots_using_PhantomJS

**Comparison**

![image](/media/112494997473_0.png)

Big improvement on font rendering
