---
title: Misconceptions your team might have during The Big Rewrite
date: 2020-06-03
---

Disclaimer: I enjoy the project I am working on and this is still a work
in progress. I just had to rant about the stuff I go through in my job
here, but it does not reflect the opinions of my emplorer, and my
personal opinion is despite these troubles we are coming along nicely

I joined a team that was doing the big rewrite in 2018. I was involved
in the project before then and knew it's ins and outs, and frankly think
it's still a great system. In order to break it's "limitations" a grand
v2 gets started. I think my team has been good. My tech lead is really
good at architecture. Where I really resist kind of "writing new
architecture that is not already there", he can pull up entirely new
concepts and abstractions that are all pretty good. Myself, I don't much
enjoy writing "new architecture" if there is something already there
that I can use, and I'll try to refer to the existence of an existing
thing instead of creating new exotic stuff.

Now, what happened during the big rewrite so far. 4 people on the team,
2 years in

Persistent confusion about sources of slowness in our app

- it's only slow because devtools is open (maybe it is! but this is
  definitely a red herring. the code should work with devtools open.
  reason that's been stated: devtools adds a "bunch of instrumentation to
  the promises that slows it down"...stated without any evidence during a
  3 hour long planning call...)
  - it's only slow because we're using a development build of react, try
    a production build (the production build makes some stuff faster, but it
    is NOT going to save your butt if you are constantly rerending all your
    components unnecessarily every millisecond during user scroll, which is
    something we suffered from, and it creeps back in if you are not careful
    because you can't write tests against this so often one day I'll be
    looking at my devtools and suddenly things are rendering twice per frame
    (signature of calling an unnecessary setState), tons of unnecessary
    components rendering in every frame (signature of
    componentShouldUpdate/bad functional react memoizing, etc))
  - it's slow because we are hogging the main thread all the time, our
    killer new feature in v2 is an intense webworker framework. now main
    thread contention is a concern, but really our app needs to just be
    performant all around, webworkers just offloads that cpu spinning to
    another core. what we have done in v2 is we went whole hog and made our
    code rely on OffscreenCanvas which 0 browsers support. also, our
    webworker bundles (worker-loader webpack build) are huge webpack things
    that pretty much contain all the code that is on the main thread so it's
    just massive. that makes it slow at loading time, and makes it harder to
    think about our worker threads in a lighter-weight way, and the worker
    concept is now very deeply entrenched in a lot of the code (all code has
    to think of things in terms of rpc calls)
  - it's slow because there are processes that haven't been aborted
    spinning in the background, so we must build out an intensive
    AbortController thing that touches the entirety of all our code
    including sending abort signals across the RPC boundary in hopes that a
    locked up webworker will respond to this (note: our first version of the
    software had zero aborting, did not from my perspective suffer.
    arguments with the team have gotten accusatory where I just claim that
    there is no evidence that the aborting is helping us, pointing to the
    fact that our old code works fine, and that if our new code suffers
    without aborting, that means something else is wrong. I have not really
    been given a proper response for this, and so the curse of passing
    AbortSignals onto every function via an extra function parameter drags
    on
  - it's slow because we are not multithreading..., so we put two views
    of the same data into different webworkers (but now each webworker
    separately downloads the same data, which leads to more resource spent,
    more network IO, more slowness)

confusion about what our old users needs are

- tracks not having per-track scroll (problem: leads to many scrolls
  within-scrolls, still unresolved problem)
- the name indexing was always a big problem (yes it is slow but is it
  really THE critical problem we face? likely not: bioinformatics people
  run a data pipeline, it takes a couple days, so what). use elasticsearch
  if it sucks so bad
- our users are "stupid" so they need to have every single thing GUI
  editable (interesting endeavor, but our design for this has been
  difficult, and has not yet delivered on simplifying the system for
  users)
- our users "do not like modal popups" so we design everything into a
  tiny sidedrawer that barely can contain the relevant data that they want
  to see
- having interest in catering to obscure or not very clear "user
  stories" like displaying the same exact region twice on the screen at
  once saying "someone will want to do this", but causing a ton of extra
  logical weirdness from this
- not catering to emerging areas of user needs such as breaking our
  large app into components that can be re-used, and instead just going
  full hog on a large monolith project and treating our monolith as a
  giant hammer that will solve everyones problems, when in reality, our
  users are also programmers that could benefit from using smaller
  componentized versions of our code
- confusion about "what our competitors have". sometimes my team one day
  was like "alright we just do that and then we have everything product X
  has?" and I just had to be clear and be like, no! the competitor has a
  reall pretty intricate complex system that we could never hope to
  replicate. but does that matter? probably not, but even still, we likely
  don't have even 20% of the full set of functions of a competitor.
  luckily we have our own strengths that make us compelling besides that
  20%
- making it so our product requires a server side component to run,
  where our first version was much more amenable to running as a static
  site

- etc...

but what does all this imply?

there are persistent confusion about what the challenges we face are,
what the architectural needs are, what our user stores are, what our new
v2 design goals are, and more. It's really crazy
