Quitting smoking: one year cold turkey, but I have worse allergies now
======================================================================

Approximately a year ago, I began thinking it would be time to quit
smoking. I smoked since about 16 years of age. Started with camel
turkish royal, then marlboro, then lucky strike, which was continued,
then a lot of pall mall...I quit from age 23-25...I relapsed the day I
got news of my sister's passing. So from 25 to 29, I smoked! I suppose
they say quitting before you are 30 is a good idea. So it was a bit
after the new years so kind of like a new years resolution. My roommates
and I all agreed to do it at the same time. We had an acupuncturist
friend stick our ears with needles and looked like little freaks with
needles in our ears around the table.

At this time I had a kind of bad sleeping setup and I had a blanket my
friend gave to me, and it was very cold in our house at nights so I'd
sleep with my head fully underneath it. Before quitting, this was
basically fine, but almost everyday post smoking I would wake up feeling
really stuffy like I had a cold, and I just kept telling everyone that I
was sick! I didn't really want to think that it was related to allergies
because it felt so much like a cold to me.

Eventually, I sort of discovered that it was the blanket was the cause
and I got a little bit better after that. Later in the year, a person in
our house had the flu, and I got it and got really sick and bed ridden
for over a week and then I felt like I never got back to 100%. Again, I
started getting the stuffiness when I woke up. It seems like it may have
kicked my immune system back into allergy sensitive mode. I think
perhaps at this time it may have been a sensitivity to pet dander on
pillow cases and in the house, and it is a subtle thing but it is so
obvious when you wake up with stuffy nose and itchy throat that goes
away pretty fast after you walk around the house for a little while.

In any case, I am very happy I quit smoking. I never think about smoking
anymore. I don't get cravings. I feel great aside from these allergic
reactions. I wish I could find more information on the web about
quitting smoking being related to some allergies, but I haven't found
too much.



One article about smoking being related to some lower allergies

"Our results suggest that smoking may be causally related to a higher
risk of asthma and a slightly lower risk of hay fever."



<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5440386/>

::: {#footer}
[ January 15th, 2020 2:05am ]{#timestamp}
:::
