import Layout from "../components/Layout"


Weekend project: graphing tumblr reblogs using cytoscape.js
===========================================================

In the past, I made an app that used RStudio's Shiny platform to plot
network graphs with RGraphviz. This worked, and gave some nice results,
but when I found out about cytoscape.js, I really wanted to try that
out.



The app is designed to plot tumblr reblogs, so it has a tree structure,
but simply plotting things as a tree is not very space efficient (as in,
the visualization takes up too much space). Therefore, using different
types of layouts can really help. 



In my first app with graphviz
<https://colindiesh.shinyapps.io/tumblrgraph>, there are several
built-in graph layouts including "neato" "twopi", "circo", and "dot"



I made all of these available for users to try in the Shiny app. The
names of the layouts don't lend much to their behavior, but they are
built-in functions in Graphviz. There are both "tree" and
"force-directed" style graph views. As I mentioned, the "tree" style
view make a lot of sense for the tumblr reblogs, but the force directed
graphs are also a lot more compact, so offering both styles is useful. 

![](../../media/128000908903_0.png)

Figure 1. My default example graph from graphviz using the twopi layout.



I wanted to replicate all the features that I had in the Graphviz app in
Cytoscape.js. Here is the breakdown of the basic components that needed
replicating:

1. Build the "graph" representation of reblogs in memory

2. Add user forms and configurability

3. Add color for distance from root using a breadth first search

4. Draw the graph



As I went along, I was happy to learn that the concepts mapped very
easily to javascript and cytoscape.js. The implementations are a little
different, but it worked out very nicely.

![](../../media/128000908903_1.png)

Figure 2. Same data plotted in Cytoscape.js with the springy layout.





In the new app, we enabled several different layouts similar to the
Graphviz app too. In cytoscape.js, the layouts that are offered
include "arbor", "springy", "cola", "cose", and "dagre". I like "cola"
because it really looks like bubbles moving around in a soda. Others are
worth experimenting with too.



![](../../media/128000908903_2.png)

Figure 3. A Cytoscape.js springy layout for a larger tumblr reblog graph



The new cytoscape.js app also has a nice animation feature. The old
graphviz app offered animation too (using Yihui's animation library for
R) but the new version can automatically encode HTML5 video on the
client side from individual picture frames in the browser using
["Whammy"](https://github.com/antimatter15/whammy)! This quite
impressive!

So to animate the graph, what is done is

1. Add nodes/edges and layout the graph (the simulation time is
configurable, because allowing the user to interact with the graph while
the simulation is running is useful)

2. Once layout is complete, the user can save the graph as an
animation, which first hides all nodes by adding visibility: hidden to
the CSS.

3. Then the nodes are re-shown one-by-one, preserving the layout, and a
frame is saved by the renderer at each step (takes a snapshot of the
canvas).

This strategy for the animation is actually better than the original
graphviz version that I had because the layout is only done once, which
is time saving and it is also more consistent (the layout changes a lot
if you re run it on different sets of nodes). 



Check out the app here <http://cmdcolin.github.io/tumblrgraph2/>

Future goals:

- Test out super large graphs (I have tested up to about 500 reblogs
but after this, around 1000 reblogs, it slows down a lot and produces
bad layouts. Needs fixing)
- Test out ability to place importance on certain nodes by increasing
node size based on it's degree

Check out an example of the HTML5 video here

::: {#footer}
[ August 30th, 2015 11:49pm ]{#timestamp} [cytoscapejs]{.tag}
[cytoscape]{.tag} [javascript]{.tag}
:::


export default ({ children }) => <Layout>{children}</Layout>
